How Do They Do It?
by Melissa Calvert
During classes where I’ve had to read and analyze anything ranging between articles and novels, the discussion
	afterward fascinated me. I felt that my peers had deeper insights into the text than me. As I entered the academic
	community, I realized there is a paper about almost every writing that is chosen for class readings and discussions.
	Did my peers, like my teacher, find these papers? Probably not. So how did they come to these abstract insights
	that eluded me?
There are several factors that affect how somebody interprets and analyzes a text. One factor is having questions in
	mind while reading. For example, if you’re used to being asked, “What are the author’s rhetorical choices in this
	piece and why did they make them?”, as I have been answering a lot throughout six months of rhetoric classes, then
	you will start to read an essay for the first time with this question in mind and find it easier to answer after
	just one reading, marking sentences for later reference during the follow-up question: “What evidence do you have
	for this?” So, the problem might be that I am terrible at thinking of the purpose behind reading something and just
	want to read it because it’s on my to-do list.
For the rereading project, we followed a method that combined both my method and my peers’. The first time something
	is being read during a trial, there are no questions. You don’t know the purpose or the specific questions behind
	what you’re reading. The second time, you can see the questions and start to understand the purpose behind your
	reading task, either finding supporting evidence from memory or rereading the segment with those questions in mind.
	After the first segment, people may start picking up on the purpose of the experiment and reading the first time
	with questions in mind, maybe even the questions of the previous segment. Readers may guess correctly what they’re
	going to be asked and begin to answer questions more quickly.
However, this is not the type of analysis I focused on. I was interested in if my insightful peers were in the
	majority, or they were as brilliant and unique as I assumed and people like me were in the majority. The analysis
	function I designed checked for responses that were given more than once and unique responses given only one time.
	My intention was that the data could be checked by the researcher to determine if people are likely to come up with
	a widely-accepted answer on the second reading or a less insightful “wrong” answer. Due to the long answers that
	were hard to cross-compare, this analysis did not end up carrying through to the finished product. However, the
	process allowed me to think more deeply about how I read and the effects of reading blindly or for pleasure compared
	to reading with a purpose.
