As students, rereading is often forced upon us. We do it for the sake of memorizing essential details for an upcoming quiz or to draw upon evidence for an assigned analytical essay. We go in with such a narrow focus, and sometimes, we even take the text at face-value. As a result, we leave with hardly any new insight about the text. Rereading can be seen more as a chore than a voluntary choice in those cases.
That prompts the question: how can we make it so that rereading is desirable and practical?
Through Rereading Redux, I learned that the answer lies in the text itself. The text we decided to study, Recitatif, invites the reader to voluntarily reread due to the nature of the text. An example would be the ambiguity around race. By not explicitly stating to the readers the race of our two main characters, Twyla and Roberta, we are left forming our own assumptions in our head. But what if the evidence points both ways, as Toni Morrison indeed did in Recitatif? There were moments in the story that alluded to our protagonist being white due to the stereotypes of race that Morrison drew upon, but there were also moments as the story progressed that caused us to question our former assumptions. Our interpretations are constantly in motion as new details are thrown in, and this is what prompts us to reread. There has to be some ambiguity—some cleverness in the storytelling—for the reader to have a desire to reread. If everything was fed to us with a spoon, then there would be no meaningful insights upon a second reading. We would already have unwoven the themes and messages that the author left behind. And this is when rereading can feel like a chore.
Following this idea, being guided with questions also helps make rereading desirable. Upon the first reading, there may be underlying themes that passed by us without a thought, especially in carefully crafted stories. It is only when posed the right questions do we realize that we missed a crucial detail. And it is this realization that pokes at our curiosity, causing us to investigate the text once more. That was certainly the case for me. I would not have realized the recurring theme of opposites had it not been one of the questions asked. That is why Reading Redux targets the readers with questions following each cold read. Through questions and carefully selected text, we attempt to make rereading a practice for the students rather than to the students.
