Funing’s Write-up
Funing Yang: Roaming Through Literature Using Computational Tools


As a double major in Computer Science and English literature, I’m always passionate about the role that technology plays in the field of humanities. What the technology can achieve? And what it cannot? Throughout the semester, I enhanced my understanding in both the tools that we used to build the analytic tools as well as the literature pieces and literary theory of rereading. In my essay, I’ll be discussing both my achievement as a computer scientist as well as a humanist. 

My role for the technical project is a combination of backend analysis, database creation, and front-end display. Our study started with the Hemingway’s six-word short story: “baby shoes for sale never worn”. We’ve designed a short online study that prompted the user to sum up how did the story make them feel in three words. The question appeared twice, each time with different context: the first time, “an ad”; the second time, “this is actually a short story”. I’m interested in the differences in people’s responses with the shifted temporal and context. Furthermore, what words did people choose in their responses and what’s the differences between the two answers? Through continuously asking the research questions, eventually I realized I wanted to investigate whether there’s a pattern of people’s unique responses with two different context, thus, I designed the function using Python the programming language to find out if there’s a pattern with the unique words used in people’s responses as the responses accumulated. My discovery is quite interesting: there seemed to be a threshold of the unique words used in the responses, and as more and more responses were being analyzed, the number of unique words stayed nearly constant. The result remained the same for both response dataset with different context, which implied that the amount of unique words, when people were pressed to submit a brief answer with the word limit, was rather limited. Besides designing analytical functions like the above one, I also honed my computer science skills through learning about Django database, React framework, as well as how to make the front-end and the back-end “talk” to each other, and to be able to apply my knowledge for them right away. Through this project, I realized that I love software development and want to pursue it further.

On the literary side, I enriched my understanding as a literature student of Tony Morrison’s text, Recitatif. And I absolutely love the times when I am immersed in the texts and discussing the theory of professional rereading with my peers. The study undoubtedly provided me with no perspectives about how to approach literature and rereading. 

The project is officially “finished”, but there’re still so many research questions to probe into, to answer (or attempt to answer), through a combination of computational tools and humanistic inquiry. For instance, currently our source texts used for the study are the six-word study as well as Morrison’s short narrative, but for the further generalization and the broader application of the tool, we need to expand our database and think of ways to generalize our analysis functions without losing too much specificity. Also, we can polish the front-end user interface to make it more engaging to the audience to encourage rereading.



Some possible prompts for your write-ups on Monday & Tuesday:



* How did you approach designing a front-end user interface that actually invites, encourages, or compels the user to read and, indeed, to reread?

* What are some of the factors that might affect not only a reader’s desire to reread a text but also their very ability to reread a text?

* How can instructors engaged in professional rereading help to ensure that students are also benefiting from the practice as much as the instructors are? In other words, how can teacher-scholars ensure that professional rereading happens for students and not just to them?  How can professional rereading be made to matter for students in a way that is actually meaningful?
 
* Of all the functions created for the reading project, which one do you find most interesting, and why? Please translate the function into the question that it is attempting to answer. 
 
 
* What would be the three solid reasons you would provide to support your treatise titled “Against Rereading”? 
Hi Eni,
Thanks so much for your email and sorry for the belated response: I was at MIT the entire afternoon and although I saw it, I need to think and formulate my response.

Yes, I discovered the similar patterns for the events too! But my question is: are we solely focus on hoaxes, or we are just saying that we’re studying the tweets as sorted by hashtags? If it was the former, then we can pick the Columbian Chemicals and the food poisoning hoax as two cases, investigate into the food poisoning one to see if the IRA used similar strategies as in the CC and write a comparison for the paper; if it was the latter, then maybe create the CDFs? Also, do we still want the time series? The reasons that I’m asking is I think with the pressing paper deadline, it might make sense to focus on aspects related to journalism, in our case, is the targeting journalists and media organizations that we’re trying to validate in other cases, and a comparison between two cases might be interesting, though I know the more evidence we have the better.

Secondly, for the Columbian Chemicals analysis, I plan to write that tonight, and although I know a huge part of it will be describing the characteristics, but are we focusing on the user engagement strategy now, or it’s better for me to write up all the strategies that I’ve found? I’m asking because I’m not sure if the case study should have a focus on the direction of the paper, or it’s a mere description of the hoax’s traits. 
Finally, I want to check in with you again regarding what’s the best step moving forward with the data that we have right now and the user accounts data that’s being labeled.  

