One of the primary challenges of this project is to compel the user to reread without forcing them. We overcame this
obstacle in many ways. For example, each segment of the reading will have to be looked at twice in order to advance to
the next segment. However, that may not be enough to encourage the user to reread. This problem was why questions were
added to make rereading seem more natural to the reader. Because of this feature, readers will be required to go back
to the text and find the evidence that allows them to answer the questions. Even if we do know that users are rereading, the
mystery of understanding how someone is rereading the text cannot be explained just by analyzing their responses to the
questions.

Through a function that tracks the reading position of the viewer, we were able to solve the issue of finding out how the
user reads and rereads a text. I find this function to be very interesting because, with this feature, we can collect data
on which region of the text the reader is looking at during which intervals of time. Then, we can derive fascinating insight
from just the scroll position of the user. At first, we thought that we would have to use eye-tracking software to understand
what the reader is doing when they are rereading. This function, however, dramatically simplifies that obstacle. Using the data
that is collected, we can recreate the “path” that the reader took throughout the reading. Not only will this tell us which
parts of the stories the readers find most interesting, but it will also tell us the duration of time they spent on that
specific section. Another type of insight we can gain from this function is a sort of “heat map” of the text. After collecting
data from multiple users, we can find trends on which parts of the text most users spent their time on.

These observations will allow us to tackle the question of how a reader rereads by seeing which parts of the text tend to
encourage rereading most from the readers. The analysis of this position data can also prompt us to analyze the most exciting
sections more carefully. Using this knowledge, we can also find out what aspects of a piece of writing causes it to be more
re-readable. All this data, along with the user responses to the questions, can help us answer the question of what factors
motivate a reader to reread a text along with providing important insight into what the reader is thinking while they are
rereading. 
