Not all rereadings are created equal: how rereading affects a reader can vary depending on several factors, ranging from its format and presentation to the after-the-fact analysis of data collected during the process. Using a digital interface, we were able to design and analyze a rereading for Toni Morrison’s Recitatif tailored to the short story’s unique qualities. 

If a text is to be read and reread in parts, these parts must be chosen carefully to help the reader maintain their flow of thought and understanding of the plot. Recitatif is particularly suited to rereading by parts, because it’s conveniently divided into five “acts”, each a short scene set in a different place and time. By rereading each act, the reader might pick up on details that they missed during the first read-through as they were adjusting to the new setting. New prompts incentivize the reader to refer back to the text, and in the process of doing so they might also discover new insights. The undercurrent of the document questions, which remain for the entirety of the text and can be changed as the reader continues reading, also maintains unity between reading and rereading each individual segment. 

The way a text is presented visually can also impact rereading. An easy-to-read interface might not be noticeable at all, since the reader would be fully absorbed in the text. A poorly-designed interface, on the other hand, distracts the reader from the text. To help make the text more readable, a standard, clean serif font (Perpetua) was chosen for the main body text. Ample whitespace and line spacing was also included to prevent the interface from looking cramped. The only issue might be the fixed height of the two columns, which may look smaller on bigger screens, but this is relatively minor and couldn’t be avoided as the height had to be controlled for across different screen dimensions in order to accurately measure scroll time. 

I find the sentiment function—which quantifies the positivity or negativity in a reader’s response—to be the most interesting. This analysis might be less applicable for some questions, such as “What descriptors are used for Maggie?”, whose responses are likely overwhelmingly negative simply because Maggie is described negatively by Twyla. Such questions are determined by the text itself, with no additional input from the reader. For other questions, however, like “How would you describe Twyla’s relationship with her mother?”, analyzing the sentiment of a reader’s answer allows us to gain insight into their emotional response to the text—information that is often conveyed unconsciously by their word choices. This way of analyzing a reader’s data most directly engages them in the rereading process and personalizes it to each individual reader—something that is especially important for a text like Recitatif, which is in itself a study on the biases of the reader. Furthermore, sharing the analysis of a reader’s response with them might allow them to discover new things about the way they reread. 
 
 

