Though it may come off as a simple and maybe even a somewhat pointless group of functions, the ones involving reading
time can give off a lot of information about a user’s rereading experience. The purpose of these functions is to
retrieve information on how long it takes someone to read the text, answer the context questions, and reread the text.
Some people like to spend time reading the text thoroughly the first time around so that they don’t need to scour the
text later to answer the correlating questions. Others like to skim the text the first time to get a general idea of
what the text is about and then go back and reread the parts that are important for answering the context questions.
Some people don’t even read the text until they’ve read the questions. Long story short, analyzing student view times
gives instructors and researchers useful insight as to what kind of reader the student is.


In addition to helping researchers analyze the various reading styles amongst students, the view time function can let
us know whether the student has already been familiarized with the text or not. If a user’s average reading time is
zero, that could mean one of two things: the user already knows the text completely or the user is just trying to hurry
up and finish this survey and get it over with.


If a user has already seen the text, then how does this study encourage such users to take the time to actually reread
the passage? As someone who has reread more passages/novels than I can count whether it be for essays, exams, or class
discussions, I know that a critical part of rereading is being able to mark up the text as the user sees fit. Therefore,
being able to virtually mark up a text is crucial for the rereading study. But even simply having tools to highlight or
underline text might give enough of an incentive for users to reread the passage. In order to solve this issue, some
context questions include an “Add Evidence” button that would push users to go back and take another look at the reading
to find proper evidence to answer the question.


Not only is giving users the ability to tag evidence directly from the passage important for the rereading study, but
something as simple as having the text positioned right next to the questions is a feature that should not be
overlooked. In a lot of SAT Prep books, for example, I remember getting easily frustrated by the tedious task of having
to flip back and forth between the questions and the passage. To solve this, I used to just take pictures of the passage
on my phone to refer to right next to the questions. On a website, having to constantly toggle between the page with the
passage and the page with the questions can be a hassle, especially if a user’s internet connection isn’t the fastest.
If this was the case for our website, then users would very easily be tempted to not reread at all, which would defeat
the purpose of the study. Therefore, having the text in an easily accessible place right next to the questions actually
gives a huge incentive for users to actually revisit the text multiple times throughout the study.
