Reviewing the Reading Redux


To me, the Reading Redux is an experimental approach to determining the meaningful ways in which the abstract perceptions and interpretations of a reader can be quantified and analyzed. Since the process of rereading necessarily requires change in focus, perspective, and understanding, this experiment is an attempt to trace and capture the thoughts of a reader in real time. When studying the effects of rereading, and when teaching the art of rereading, natural questions arise: what traits of a text make it conducive to rereading? What motivates someone to retrace their steps, to shift into another perspective, to reach for new meaning? 
        Using Recitatif as the main text in our studies, we generated possible (but not definitive) answers to these questions. As an experiment in its own right, the ambiguity and complexity which characterize Recitatif also make it ideal for studying rereading techniques. In particular, certain traits — the discontinuous chronology, the parallels and paradoxes that simultaneously exist in the lives of Twyla and Roberta, the recurring dialogue as they age — pique the reader’s interest enough to reread the parts that are confusing, without being inscrutable to an impossible degree. In fact, the most persistent question interwoven throughout Recitatif — between Twyla and Roberta, who is black and who is white? — is both relatively basic and perpetually unanswered, and this lack of definition spurs the natural, distinctly human curiosity that lies in all readers. In doing so, Recitatif and similar texts could transform the process of rereading from one of professional, clinical dissections to one of genuine enjoyment and pleasure. 
        
        One of the most interesting functions that we created to actually capture data about the action of rereading was one which tracked the scroll position of the user over time. Since each segment was sizeable, the task of answering the questions associated with each segment necessitated the revisiting and reconsideration of past text. Thus, embedded in the scroll data is information about which parts of the text the reader might have found confusing, which questions needed more meditation that others in order to produce a satisfactory answer, and what trends there may be in the reading rates of users upon their first readings, compared to subsequent rereadings. For example, of the parts of the text which the reader lingers on, a longer continuation of a scroll position might indicate that the reader is using that section to think about a more open-ended question, whereas a shorter but still continuous scroll position would indicate that the reader is referencing for a basic comprehension question (e.g the location of the scene). 
        On one hand, the scroll data is interesting because it provides a map of the reader’s “footsteps” through the text. Longer periods of time spent at the same location could indicate confusion or hesitation, speaking indirectly to the difficulty of the text at that location. Quick reversals of position could indicate rereading for reminders of small details that might have been forgotten, and decreases in reading time at each location could indicate an overall trend of learning and understanding. 
However, on the other hand, it is important to note that the actual causes of the observable scrolling behavior are only conjectures. In other words, there is not yet a function that delves directly into the mind of a reader to capture the cognitive processes that occur in reaction to reading a text. This way, the scroll function is also interesting for the new questions it generates: are there common thought patterns that cause the decision to reread? Without this information, just how meaningful are the general trends in the scroll data? In fact, if all our statistics can be further unpacked, how deep must the quantification process go in order to glean truly significant information about the rereading process? What are the limitations on this process?
Thus, on the one hand, it could be seen that the products of rereading are not impossible to parse into data. However, these tiny bytes of factual information are only concise, overarching summaries of the observable. The causes that lie below the surface -- whether it is confusion or emotion that causes an increase in reading time, whether word choice is determined by specific emotion or simply personality -- remain to be explored.