the_journey_of_reread_count

During the beginning stages of the Reading Redux project, I worked with another lab member to brainstorm an idea for an analysis function. We decided that a function counting the number of times a person rereads a text would be valuable in analyzing the impacts of rereading. I would later carry this analysis function through the backend and frontend integration of the prototype app. Eventually my function, in a slightly different form, would make its appearance as part of the final web application. Through the Reading Redux project, I’ve been able to see my growth both as a programmer and a reader.


By having experienced the process of brainstorming and coding an analysis function from scratch, I learned ways to refactor code to become more efficient. When I realized the inflexibility of my original function, I refactored my code to work with mutable data types. In order to be integrated into the prototype web application, my function had to be modified slightly because the input to the function changed. In order to integrate my function into the frontend, I needed to evaluate the most useful way to display my results. Working on the Reading Redux project helped me developed a habit of evaluating my code and understanding the reason for my code. I had to modify my function again in order to integrate it into the final web application. I was surprised to find that I needed to simplify my function rather than add more. However, after I modified my function, the process of the backend and frontend integration was very similar to the integration I did for the prototype web application. Therefore, I was able to run through the process again and reinforce the skills I’ve gained. I finally understood why code needed to be written and rewritten repeatedly, and I’ve become a better programmer because of the project.


My participation in the Reading Redux project has made me realize the importance of rereading and the subtleties of the rereading process. By creating an analysis function, I had to think about the way in which readers interact with the text. From working with “Recitatif”, I realized the tremendous impact my assumptions and biases had on my reading of the text. Toni Morrison’s “Recitatif” is a piece that straddles the fence between many sets of opposites. In order to perform the experiment, Morrison had to maintain a balance between the different assumptions for two racial identities. Morrison’s writing also determined the length of her story so that it is neither too long nor too short. The sense of conflict that Morrison inflicts within her readers is exactly the tool necessary to spark deeper evaluation and critical thinking. Upon learning about the experiment that Toni Morrison was attempting to conduct, I reread the text and recognized my prejudices. Rereading helped me come to terms with some perspectives that I held, ones that I didn’t even realize I believed in. As I reread, I was able to put on a more objective lens and realize my own biases and assumptions. My participation in the Reading Redux project has changed the way I interpret and consider text, and I hope to bring this critical eye that I have developed to further readings I will do in the future.
