<p>A lot of the time when students reread texts, they do so because they feel they are obligated to, as a result of a
classroom assignment. As a result, these rereadings can become robotic perusals of the text, where the student
is methodically scanning for an answer to the prompt the instructor assigned, instead of actively enjoying and being
engaged with the text. I believe there are several actions that instructors can take to make rereading more productive
and enjoyable for students.</p>

<p>One of the most important steps that can be taken is ensuring that the text is a good candidate for rereading.
Obviously, there are some texts that provide a greater benefit to the reader when they are reread compared to others.
Some examples of these texts are stories with a deeper meaning hidden underneath a shallow meaning that is easy to
understand. The deeper meaning would require a slow and deliberate reading to uncover. For many students, they may
only see and understand the superficial meaning of a text the first time they read it, but then discover the deeper
meaning after a close rereading. If instructors assign this type of text, then the multiple layers of meaning ensure
that the students stay engaged with the text when they reread and are more likely to remain interested since they will
be uncovering a new facet to the story.</p>

<p>Another step to improve the experience of rereading is to add guiding questions throughout the process. I believe this
is something our project did a great job including and integrating within the web application. These questions would
prevent the students from becoming lost or unsure of what they should be looking for when they reread. It would
provide a specific direction and purpose for the students’ rereading. This would also increase their understanding of
the text, especially if the questions are well thought out, since the students would have specific key ideas they are
actively seeking to understand as they read.</p>

<p>Finally, breaking up the reading into smaller sections that are easier to tackle and understand is also important.
When rereading, it can be daunting to face the entire text at once, especially if it is lengthy and complex. Again,
this is a potential issue that I think our project addressed very well. The Rereading project breaks up the text into
several shorter segments that are more approachable, with each segment containing questions that are specific to it,
but also including questions pertaining to the entire text. These segments were not randomly chosen; thought was put
into how the segments would be formed. The text that we worked with, Recitatif, is divided into five distinct sections,
where each section has key noticeable differences. This division ensured that each segment shares a common setting and
discussion. The different segments by themselves are coherent pieces of text, but when combined, the segments form
the greater text as a whole. This step of breaking up the reading reduces the chance that a reader will become
distracted or disinterested in each section, and will hopefully increase the benefit the reader gets out of
rereading, since they will be more focused and engaged.</p>

<p>Overall, I think these are a few of the key steps that can be taken to improve the rereading process for students.
Our project did a great job of building in features that follow these steps. Most importantly, in order to ensure
that rereading is happening for a student instead of to him, the rereading process must be enjoyable and not feel as
if it is forced onto the student. This way, both the instructor and the student can gain a deeper appreciation and
understanding of a text.</p>
